# Getting Hired in Tech

![inline](shopify.png)![inline](brain-station.png)

^ Hi! I'm Mina. I work for RnD at Shopify. I've been here five months, and I'm
here to talk to you about getting hired in tech!

---

# What I do

^ I develop software at Shopify. Most of it isn't user facing. I write code that
allows other developers to better interface with the Shopify platform.

^ Currently, my project is our just launched JS Buy SDK.

---

# How'd I get here?

^ I've spent a lot of years working in technology and writing code. I actually
started writing software for money the summer before I started university, at
the National Centre for Audiology. I've worked in industrial software (oil &
gas) in the southern US. I worked at theScore for several years developing
internal tools, devops software, and eventually leading theScore.com team. I
feel like I've been around in this industry long enough, and sat on both sides
of the interviewing table enough times that I may have some minor insights on
how this process works.

^ This leads us to...

---

# Getting Hired

### ...

### Or just getting that first interview

^ This can be hard. It can be really hard especially if you don't know where to
start.

^ Often the hardest part is getting noticed.

---

# Getting Noticed

^ So how do you get noticed? There's a lot of ways  There's especially a lot of
ways that schools like brain station, bitmaker, hacker you, light house labs,
and others will focus on. I want to talk about some of those today.

---

## Resume

^ Your resume! This is the classic "What you need to submit to get a job" thing.
It's very common in most industries.

---

## ~~Resume~~

^ It's too bad, but it's not that important in tech. It IS important, but it's
not the most important thing. At best, your resume is a quick way to screen you
for major red flags, get a really brief overview of your experience, and get
some points of contact so that you can be investigated further.

^ What do I mean by investigated further?

---

## Github

^ The most common approach to this is to take a look at your github. It's like a
real technical resume. Most companies understand that the majority of what
you've worked on may not be public, but hopefully there are a couple examples of
your work so that we can get an idea of what your code looks like.

^ The major thing I might look at here is either: Are you solving interesting
problems? Or if not, if you've just done a bunch of TODOMVC style things, or
simple demos, did you take care in what you write? Is the code clean and
organized? Your github can serve as a portfolio, or an insight into your
interests in coding.

^ So github is great, but it's not the biggest thing or most useful thing that
can be looked at. It used to be that every candidate has a resume, and only some
candidates have a github profile. That's changed a bit to where the majority of
candidates have a github profile. So what do we look at now?

---

# Community Involvement

^ Community involvement is huge. I don't care how junior you are or what
programming language you want to work in: there's a meetup for you.

^ Hack nights and socials are both wonderful things to go to. You'll meet a lot
of people, some employed, some not. This is an opportunity for you to network in
a relaxed environment.

^ Hack nights are particularly useful because they give you an opportunity to
work with people of different experience levels. You can grow your skills or
help mentor another person. Both of which help you grow as a developer.

^ Also remember: your community involvement is visible! Most groups use
meetup.com and attendee lists for these things are public and searchable.
Employers take notice.

^ All of this leads us to the best way to get a job not just in tech, but
anywhere:

---

# Referrals

^ The more relationships you can build, the more people you know with influence
over hiring, the less a lot of this stuff matters. Of course we want you to be
competent, but if we know you as a person and feel good enough about you to
refer you: You've jumped over the hardest hurdle around getting noticed.

^ So what happens next? Well hopefully:

---

# Hooray! You've got an interview!

^ You're probably terrified and wondering what to do next. It's not easy. It's
like stage fright with economic penalties for poor performance. With all this in
mind, it's easy to say, but the most important thing you can ever do while
interviewing is to...

---

# Be Yourself

^ I can't say this enough. At Shopify, and at other places I've interviewed, the
interviewers goal is always in some way geared toward making you show your true
self. They'll ask you your life story. They'll ask it again.

^ I've been on both sides of the table, and believe me, the interviewer doesn't
want to do the talking. We want you to. And we want you to be consistent, and
authentic.

---

# What's the interviewer looking for?

^ So what's the interviewer looking for? Well.... a lot of things.

---

# Technical competence

^ This is the most obvious thing. The interviewer wants to know that you know
your shit.

^ How do you get that across?

---

### Talk about your successes

## And your failures

^ It's always good to share your successes. It shows that you've done work. You
know what succeeding feels like.

^ Now a lot of people are shy about this, but it's almost more important. Talk
about your failures. Tell us when you wrote a thing, then discovered a couple
months down the road that it didn't scale, or that it'd been doing something
weird that nobody caught. Tell us how you overcame this, or tried to solve the
problem.

^ This is reality. No tech company has a flawless record. Everything breaks. We
really want to know how you've dealt with those situations. It's more useful
than any behavioural question an interviewer can ask.

---

## FIT

^ This is another thing I want to bring up. On top of technical competence a lot
of companies want to evaluate you for fit.

^ Now this is an awful word.

^ Fit used to be defined as "Would I have a beer with this person". This is a
highly subjective approach, and leads to a ton of bias. Bias that's evident in
the monoculture that is tech.

^ I wanted to touch on this, but not dive in to it. It's just important for you
all to be aware that in cases, the deck is stacked if your part of a minority in
tech. Bias exists throughout the industry. However, building rapport and meeting
people in person and more than anything: being present, is the best way around
this.

^ So what should fit mean? What does it mean at Shopify? We're tried to move
away from fit because of these problems. It can be far more constructive and
objective to talk about values alignment and a potential candidate's ability to
contribute. This moves the discussion from "Would you have a beer with this
person" to "Do you think this person would be a contributor to the team". It's a
much better way to frame this concept and move away from, or at least aknowledge
subjective biases.

---

# Waiting

^ So you've got through the interview, now the real hard part: Waiting.

^ All I can say is try to be patient. You're likely not the only candidate. Even
if the interviewer thinks it's a sure thing, it's probably not up to just them,
and they undoubtedly have to interview more people.

^ So be patient. Reach out, but don't email every day asking for updates.

^ Try to be patient.

---

# Getting the job!

### Or not.

^ Regardless of what happens, you either learned how to be better at
interviewing, or you've got a job. Either way life goes on, and there'll be
other opportunities in your long illustrious tech career.

---

# Thanks!

## Q & A
